# Foreign Investments Protection Act (Cap. 518) — Kenya (key excerpts)

1. Short title
This Act may be cited as the Foreign Investments Protection Act.

2. Interpretation
(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
"approved" in relation to any enterprise, foreign currency, period, sum or amount means any enterprise, currency, period, sum or amount specified in the relevant certificate issued under section 3;
"foreign assets" includes foreign currency, credits, rights, benefits or property, any currency, credits, rights, benefits or property obtained by the expenditure of foreign currency, the provision of foreign credit, or the use or exploitation of foreign rights, benefits or property, and any profits from an investment in an approved enterprise by the holder of a certificate issued under section 3 in relation to that enterprise;
"foreign national" means a person who is not a citizen of Kenya, and includes a body corporate not being a body incorporated in Kenya;
"the Cabinet Secretary" means the Cabinet Secretary for the time being responsible for finance.

3. Foreign investors may apply for and be granted certificates
(1) A foreign national who proposes to invest foreign assets in Kenya may apply to the Cabinet Secretary for a certificate that the enterprise in which the assets are proposed to be invested is an approved enterprise for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary shall consider every application made under subsection (1) and in any case in which he is satisfied that the enterprise would further the economic development of, or would be of benefit to Kenya, he may in his discretion issue a certificate to the applicant.
(4) Every certificate shall state—
(a) the name of the holder;
(b) the name and a description of the enterprise;
(c) the amount of the foreign assets invested or to be invested by the holder of the certificate in the enterprise divided as between capital and any loan;
(d) the foreign currency invested or to be invested;
(f) such other matters as may be necessary or desirable for the purposes of this Act.
(5) If the foreign assets have not yet been invested a conditional certificate shall be issued stating the period in which they shall be invested.

4. Amendment of certificate
The Cabinet Secretary may amend a certificate granted under section 3 in cases including succession to the interest, change of name of the enterprise, investment of new foreign assets, or extension of the period during which foreign assets are to be invested, subject to the conditions set out in the Act.

5. Foreign assets to be brought in during approved period
If, at the time at which a certificate is issued under this Act, any foreign assets or part thereof to which the certificate relates have not been invested in the approved enterprise, they shall be so invested within the approved period, and, if not so invested within that period, the certificate shall be deemed to have been revoked.

7. Transfer of profits, etc.
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law for the time being in force, the holder of a certificate may, in respect of the approved enterprise to which such certificate relates, transfer out of Kenya in the approved foreign currency and at the prevailing rate of exchange—
(a) the profits, including retained profits which have not been capitalized, after taxation, arising from or out of his investment in foreign assets:
Provided that any increase in the capital value of the investment arising out of the sale of the whole or any part of the capital assets of the enterprise or revaluation of capital assets shall not be deemed to be profit arising from or out of the investment for the purposes of this Act;
(b) the capital specified in the certificate as representing and being deemed to be the fixed amount of the equity of the holder of the certificate in the enterprise for the purpose of this Act;
(c) the principal and interest of any loan specified in the certificate.

8. Compulsory acquisition
No approved enterprise or any property belonging thereto shall be compulsorily taken possession of, and no interest in or right over such enterprise or property shall be compulsorily acquired, except in accordance with the provisions concerning compulsory taking of possession and acquisition and the payment of full and prompt payment of compensation contained in section 75 of the Constitution and reproduced in the Schedule to this Act.

8B. Special arrangement for investment promotion and protection
(1) The Cabinet Secretary for finance may, from time to time, by notice in the Gazette declare that the arrangement specified in the notice, being arrangements made with the Government of any country with a view to promoting and protecting the investments of that country in Kenya, shall have effect according to its tenor.
